FAQ-Wallet cleanup (#579)
btcpayserver/btcpayserver-doc: docs/FAQ/FAQ-Wallet.md

# BTCPay Server Wallet FAQ

This document contains frequently questions related to BTCPay Server's [internal wallet](Wallet.md).

* [What is BTCPay Server wallet?](#what-is-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [How to set up my wallet with BTCPay Server?](#how-to-set-up-my-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Can I use a hardware wallet with BTCPay Server?](#can-i-use-a-hardware-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?](#do-i-have-to-use-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [Missing payments in wallet?](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet)
* [Electrum and Zap show different addresses](#receiving-address-in-zap-and-electrum-is-different)
* [What is a derivation scheme?](#what-is-a-derivation-scheme)
* [I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?](#i-don-t-see-lightning-network-payments-in-btcpay-wallet)

## What is BTCPay Server wallet?

> BTCPay Server has an internal wallet which you can use to preview incoming and outgoing transactions and manage your funds. It works like any other wallet, but has enhanced privacy features by default, and also solves certain UX problems you may encounter when using an external wallet with BTCPay Server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BTCPay Server has an internal wallet which you can use to preview incoming and outgoing transactions and manage your funds.
It works like any other wallet, but has enhanced privacy features by default and also solves certain UX problems you may encounter when using an external wallet with BTCPay Server. 
```

For more information on how to use the built-in wallet [check this page](/Wallet.md). To use the internal wallet, you first need to [set up the wallet](/WalletSetup.md) with your BTCPay store.

## How to set up my wallet with BTCPay Server?

Check our in-depth documentation on [how to set up a wallet](/WalletSetup.md).

## Can I use a hardware wallet with BTCPay Server?

The internal wallet has a [built in hardware wallet integration](/Vault.md). You can use a supported hardware wallet with the [BTCPay wallet](Wallet.md). 

This  means that you're using a hardware wallet without leaking information to third-party apps or servers, since the wallet relays on the full node in your BTCPay.
 
## Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?

> By default BTCPay Server only requires an extended public key. To receive payments to your BTCPay store, you need to provide an extended public key (xpub) which you can generate in an external wallet. You do not have to use a built in wallet at all, you can manage funds in your [existing wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default BTCPay Server only requires an extended public key.
To receive payments to your BTCPay store, you need to provide an extended public key (xpub) which you can generate in an external wallet. You do not have to use a built in wallet at all, you can manage funds in your [existing wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet).
```

> However, it's recommended to use a built in wallet for funds management. The built in wallet improves your privacy by default, but also solves user-experience issues like [gap-limit](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet).

Reviewer: - There might be missing a warning here that the internal wallet can be a hot wallet if setup that way and that there can be loss of funds for XYYZ reasons.

- On that note, the word "recommended" might be too much. Why would we recommend a hot wallet instead of a HWW xpub setup ?

- The initial question being do I HAVE TO use the internal wallet, maybe there could be a list stating the usages that absolutely need the internal hot wallet to work (ie, payjoin ?) and that other usecases can be done either way ?

Author: No this has nothing to do with a hot wallet, nor is hot wallet recommended.

Author: @Zaxounette you probably need to understand wallet a bit more, internal wallet is not a hot wallet.

Reviewer: Np

## Missing payments in my software or hardware wallet

If you're using an [existing software or a hardware wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet) with your BTCPay Server, you may experience a discrepancy between balance in your BTCPay wallet and the external wallet's web, destkop or mobile app. This discrepancy is usually related to a **gap-limit** issue. 

### The gap limit problem

> Majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification),share a node between many users. To  prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount of addresses without balance they follow on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification), share a node between many users. To  prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount of addresses without balance they follow on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 
```

With above in mind, after BTCPay Server generates 20 consecutive unpaid invoices, the external wallet stops fetching the transactions, assuming no new transactions occurred. Once 21st, 22nd, etc invoices are paid, your external wallet won't show them.

> On the other hand, internal BTCPay Server wallet is a full-node reliant wallet. It does not relay on a third-party and is able to always show a correct balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, the internal BTCPay Server wallet is a full-node reliant wallet. It does not rely on a third-party and is able to always show a correct balance.
```

### The gap limit solution

> It's not easy to solve the gap limit problem. You have two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to solve the gap limit problem, you have two options:
```

1. Increase the gap limit in your external wallet

> 2. Use internal BTCPay Server wallet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use the internal BTCPay Server wallet
```

#### 1. Increasing the gap limit

If your wallets supports configurable gap-limit, the easy fix is to increase it. However, majority of wallets do not allow this. 

> The only wallets that allow configurable gap-limit value are [Electrum](/ElectrumWallet.md) and [Wasabi](/WasabiWallet.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only wallets that allow for a configurable gap-limit value are [Electrum](/ElectrumWallet.md) and [Wasabi](/WasabiWallet.md)
```

> If you'd like to use an external wallet to manage the funds, we recommend that perform a wallet recovery with those two wallets.

Reviewer: I don't understand the meaning behind this sentence.

Do you mean that we should use Electrum or Wasabi and make a recovery of the wallet used ? Unclear.

Author: No idea what I did there ,fixing.

- [Increasing gap limit in Electrum](/ElectrumWallet.md/#configuring-the-gap-limit-in-electrum)
- [Increasing gap limit in Wasabi](/WasabiWallet.md/#configuring-the-gap-limit-in-wasabi)

After you've increased the gap limit, the balance in your external wallet and btcpay wallet should match. If they don't you may have set up your derivation scheme incorrectly.

#### 2. Use the internal wallet

> For best user-experience and privacy, we recommend that you consider dropping external wallets and start using the [BTCPay Server's internal wallet](/Wallet.md).

Reviewer: This sentence is out of context.
```suggestion
To automatically resolve the gap limit problem, we recommend that you consider dropping external wallets and start using the [BTCPay Server's internal wallet](/Wallet.md).
```

Author: It's not it touched upon privacy issue.

Reviewer: But the initial question of that section is about the gap limit. It would make sense to me that this sentence answers the question in that context ?

## What is a derivation scheme?

> No matter [how you set up your wallet](/WalletSetup.md), BTCPay Server uses `derivation scheme` to represent the destination of the funds received by your invoices. The destination of those funds will be your wallet, located by the xpubkey that you provide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No matter [how you set up your wallet](/WalletSetup.md), BTCPay Server uses a `derivation scheme` to represent the destination of the funds received by your invoices. The destination of those funds will be your wallet, located by the xpubkey that you provide.
```

# BTCPay Server Wallet FAQ

This document contains frequently asked questions related to BTCPay Server's [internal wallet](Wallet.md).

* [What is BTCPay Server wallet?](#what-is-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [How to set up my wallet with BTCPay Server?](#how-to-set-up-my-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Can I use a hardware wallet with BTCPay Server?](#can-i-use-a-hardware-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?](#do-i-have-to-use-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [Missing payments in wallet?](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet)
* [What is a derivation scheme?](#what-is-a-derivation-scheme)
* [I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?](#i-dont-see-lightning-network-payments-in-btcpay-wallet)

## What is BTCPay Server wallet?

> BTCPay Server has an internal wallet which you can use to preview incoming and outgoing transactions and manage your funds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
BTCPay Server has an internal wallet which you can use to view incoming and outgoing associated Bitcoin transactions and spend your funds.
```

> It works like any other wallet, but has enhanced privacy features by default and also solves certain UX problems you may encounter when [using an existing wallet] with BTCPay Server. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It works like any other wallet, but has enhanced privacy features (non-custodial, no third-parties, verified with a dedicated full node, etc.) by default and also solves certain UX problems you may encounter when [using an existing wallet] with BTCPay Server. 
```

For more information on how to use the built-in wallet [check this page](/Wallet.md). To use the internal wallet, you first need to [set up the wallet](/WalletSetup.md) with your BTCPay store.

## How to set up my wallet with BTCPay Server?

Check our in-depth documentation on [how to set up a wallet](/WalletSetup.md).

## Can I use a hardware wallet with BTCPay Server?

The internal wallet has a [built in hardware wallet integration](/Vault.md). You can use a supported hardware wallet with the [BTCPay wallet](Wallet.md). 

> This  means that you're using a hardware wallet without leaking information to third-party apps or servers, since the wallet relays on the full node in your BTCPay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This  means that you're using a hardware wallet without leaking information to third-party apps or servers unlike the default software for the devices, since the wallet relies on the full node in your BTCPay.
```

 
## Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?

> By default BTCPay Server only requires an extended public key. To receive payments to your BTCPay store, you need to provide an extended public key (xpub) which you can generate in an external (existing) wallet. You do not have to use a built in wallet at all, you can manage funds in your [existing wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default BTCPay Server only requires an extended public key. To receive payments to your BTCPay store, you need to provide an extended public key (xpub) which you can generate in an external (existing) wallet. You do not have to use the built in wallet at all, you can manage funds in your [existing wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet).
```

> However, it's recommended to use a built in wallet for funds management. The built in wallet improves your privacy by default, but also solves user-experience issues like [gap-limit](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it's recommended to use the built in wallet for funds management. The built in wallet not only improves your privacy by default, but also solves user-experience issues like [gap-limit](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet).
```

## Missing payments in my software or hardware wallet

If you're using an [existing software or a hardware wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet) with your BTCPay Server, you may experience a discrepancy between balance in your BTCPay wallet and the external wallet's web, destkop or mobile app. This discrepancy is usually related to a **gap-limit** issue. 

### The gap limit problem

> Majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification), which share a node between many users. To prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount of addresses without balance they follow on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification), which share a node between many users. To prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount (typically 20) of addresses without balance that they track on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 
```

> The majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification), which share a node between many users. To prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount (typically 20) of addresses without balance that they track on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 

Reviewer 3: This issue is not unique to SPV wallets, full nodes have to deal with the gap limit too, and even btcpay itself when restoring from backup. Even if you have plenty of available resources, you still need to have *some* gap limit in place.

Author: Great point, I would still like to mention SPV since majority of BTCPay users do use an SPV wallet as their existing wallet. 

How about now after the change?

Reviewer 3: Are users familiar with the term "SPV"? How about calling them "light wallets" instead?

Also note that there are very few wallets that are actually SPV nowadays. The original Android Bitcoin wallet, BRD, and a couple more wallets still do, but the majority of light wallets are either based on a centralized API server operated by the wallet's developers, or on Electrum servers.

Author: Great point, I don't think they are, light wallet makes more sense. I also changed the link pointing. I've made a change now.

With above in mind, after BTCPay Server generates 20 consecutive unpaid invoices, the external wallet stops fetching the transactions, assuming no new transactions occurred. Once 21st, 22nd, etc invoices are paid, your external wallet won't show them.

> On the other hand, internal BTCPay Server wallet is a full-node reliant wallet. It does not relay on a third-party and is able to always show a correct balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the other hand, internally, BTCPay Server wallet tracks any address it generates itself along with a much greater gap limit. It does not rely on a third-party and is able to always show a correct balance.
```

### The gap limit solution

It's not easy to solve the gap limit problem. You have two options:

1. Increase the gap limit in your existing (external) wallet
2. Use internal BTCPay Server wallet

#### 1. Increasing the gap limit

> If your [external/existing wallet](/WalletSetup.md/#use-an-existing-wallet) allows gap-limit configuration, the easy fix is to increase it. However, majority of wallets do not allow this. 

Reviewer 3: Is there a way to see the current largest gap from the btcpay gui? It might be useful to show this somewhere, so users can know what gap limit to configure their external wallets with.

Author: We do have a wallet rescan (utxoscan) feature, is that what you mean?
![rescan](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/36959754/84591443-ae146900-ae3e-11ea-9e73-3953449ed59e.PNG)

Reviewer 3: I meant a way to see the current largest gap that exists in the wallet, similarly to [this](https://github.com/shesek/bwt#get-hdfingerprintgap).

Author: I don't think we do, interesting. Ping @Kukks ^

Reviewer 2: No we don't particularly keep track of this

> The only wallets that allow gap-limit configuration, that we're aware of are [Electrum](/ElectrumWallet.md) and [Wasabi](/WasabiWallet.md)

Reviewer 2: Ledger Live, samourai do too i think?

Author: Ledger Live untested and afaik in beta? Samourai does not have configurable gap limit, but a fixed one of 50 afair.

# BTCPay Server Wallet FAQ

This document contains frequently asked questions related to BTCPay Server's [internal wallet](Wallet.md).

* [What is BTCPay Server wallet?](#what-is-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [How to set up my wallet with BTCPay Server?](#how-to-set-up-my-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Can I use a hardware wallet with BTCPay Server?](#can-i-use-a-hardware-wallet-with-btcpay-server)
* [Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?](#do-i-have-to-use-btcpay-server-wallet)
* [Missing payments in wallet?](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet)

> * [Electrum and Zap show different addresses](#receiving-address-in-zap-and-electrum-is-different)

Reviewer 4: This question is removed below.

* [What is a derivation scheme?](#what-is-a-derivation-scheme)

> * [I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?](#i-don-t-see-lightning-network-payments-in-btcpay-wallet)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* [I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?](#i-dont-see-lightning-network-payments-in-btcpay-wallet)
```

This  means that you're using a hardware wallet without leaking information to third-party apps or servers, since the wallet relays on the full node in your BTCPay.
 
## Do I have to use BTCPay Server wallet?

By default BTCPay Server only requires an extended public key. To receive payments to your BTCPay store, you need to provide an extended public key (xpub) which you can generate in an external (existing) wallet. You do not have to use a built in wallet at all, you can manage funds in your [existing wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet).

However, it's recommended to use a built in wallet for funds management. The built in wallet improves your privacy by default, but also solves user-experience issues like [gap-limit](#missing-payments-in-my-software-or-hardware-wallet).

## Missing payments in my software or hardware wallet

If you're using an [existing software or a hardware wallet](/WalletSetup/#use-an-existing-wallet) with your BTCPay Server, you may experience a discrepancy between balance in your BTCPay wallet and the external wallet's web, destkop or mobile app. This discrepancy is usually related to a **gap-limit** issue. 

### The gap limit problem

> Majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification),share a node between many users. To  prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount of addresses without balance they follow on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Majority of third party wallets are [SPV wallets](https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Simplified_Payment_Verification), which share a node between many users. To prevent performance issues, SPV wallets limit the amount of addresses without balance they follow on the blockchain. BTCPay Server generates a new address for every invoice. 
```

|Multi-sig P2WSH	| 2-of-xpub1...-xpub2... |
|Multi-sig P2SH-P2WSH	| 2-of-xpub1...-xpub2...-[p2sh] |
|Multi-sig P2SH |	2-of-xpub1...-xpub2...-[legacy] |

## I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?

> [Lightning Network](/LightningNetwork.md) and BTCPay [wallet](/Wallet.md) are different concepts. Internal BTCPay Server wallet only shows on-chain payments. In the future, they may become unified, but for the time being, to manage your Lightning Network funds, use Ride the Lightning, ThunderHub, externally connected Lightning wallet (Zeus, Zap, Spark), or a command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Lightning Network](/LightningNetwork.md) and the BTCPay Server [wallet](/Wallet.md) are different concepts. The internal BTCPay Server wallet only shows on-chain payments.
In the future they may become unified but for the time being, to manage your Lightning Network funds, use Ride the Lightning, ThunderHub, an externally connected Lightning wallet (Zeus, Zap, Spark), or the Command Line Interface (CLI).
```

|Multi-sig P2WSH	| 2-of-xpub1...-xpub2... |
|Multi-sig P2SH-P2WSH	| 2-of-xpub1...-xpub2...-[p2sh] |
|Multi-sig P2SH |	2-of-xpub1...-xpub2...-[legacy] |

## I don't see Lightning network payments in BTCPay wallet?

The [Lightning Network](/LightningNetwork.md) and the BTCPay Server [wallet](/Wallet.md) are different concepts. The internal BTCPay Server wallet only shows on-chain payments.

> In the future they may become unified but for the time being, to manage your Lightning Network funds, use Ride the Lightning, ThunderHub, an externally connected Lightning wallet (Zeus, Zap, Spark), or the Command Line Interface (CLI).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the future they may become unified but for the time being, to manage your Lightning Network funds, use Ride the Lightning, ThunderHub, an externally connected Lightning wallet (Zeus, Zap, Spark, etc), or the Command Line Interface (CLI).
```
